Eric Li
Professor Andrew Barbour
English R1B
15 December 2017
The Impacts of Actualization Science Fiction
	For as long as people have been able to breathe, they have been able to dream – not only of passionate fantasies and imaginary creatures, but of distant realities and the means to create them. Today, many of the visions men once thought to be impossible, from airplanes to gravity waves, exist as undeniable achievements, and yet, pioneers continue to explore. But with exploration comes more than invention, but also adrenaline, anticipation, and, perhaps above all, fear of the uncharted: technophobia. At the cross-section of technology and literature, technophobia exists not only as a tool for authors to engage readers in a thought-provoking plot, but also as their direct channel to call for caution and reflection from their audience. However, for such a message to be truly effective, the premise of its delivery must not be grounded in the purely fantastical visions of men, but the more rational futures of reality, especially in science fiction, as it is in Never Let Me Go by Kazuo Ishiguro. Never Let Me Go masterfully presents stringent scientific basis to make its motifs relevant to human cruelty and the emotional disconnect between people and their products, in this case clones. By utilizing light layers of actualization, being scientific means and assumptions that are not true in the present but possibly so in the future, within his science fiction work, authors like Ishiguro not only strengthen the uncanny feeling of technophobia impressed upon the reader on a fundamental level, but also strengthen the impact of his message by bringing it closer to the interpreter’s reality.
      But before discussing the merits of the actualization mode of science fiction and its role in Never Let Me Go, we must first define it. Unlike works of speculative fiction or alternative history, fiction founded on a scientific basis requires a foothold, considering the social and technological conditions of the modern day. One of the most popular outlines for this mode of actualization was proposed by Griffin in her critique, “Science and the cultural imaginary: the case of Kazuo Ishiguro's Never Let Me Go.” While Griffin proposes a strong definition to outline the features of this actualization mode as the “accuracy in the depiction of the state of scienti?c knowledge at the time of the production of the novel,”  “the presentation of actual scienti?c intervention, the actualization in ?ction of a scienti?cally plausible scenario”,  and “the use of scienti?c, ‘expert’ vocabulary,” these constraints may be too harshly defined for the purposes of technophobia; the boundaries Griffin defines are more suited for a lab report than a mode of science fiction, especially in regards to the third point about scientific diction, and restrain the author’s creative liberty (648). A novel of science fiction can reasonably postulate a future scenario without the use of complex jargon. For example, the human cloning present in Never Let Me Go is a reasonable objective factoring in the speed of current biogenetic research; the scientific vocabulary and high-level evidence authenticating the premise’s possibility are all available to the modern day, and do not need to be replicated by the novel. Furthermore, while it is true that the actualization mode of science fiction should indeed reflect modern capabilities accurately, this should not serve as a basis for denying all extreme and possibly dystopian premises in the actualization mode of science fiction. The future is hard to predict, but if the author creates one within the scope of advancing research, without violating laws of nature, how can anyone completely deny its possibility of becoming a reality? If a work of science fiction can exist practically in such a way, it should fall sunder the actualization mode of science fiction.
	With this definition of the actualization mode of science fiction in mind – that is, being any science fiction novel with a premise that has the possibility of one day becoming a reality in the future, regardless of the timeline within the book – Never Let Me Go by Kazuo Ishiguro is one of the defining works of the genre. While there are many technical parts of the novel which may be hard to believe in the present, such as the points Griffin cites from Harrison, including ‘How are clones kept alive once they’ve begun “donating”,’ most of these cases can be assumed solvable in the future considering the advancement of medical technology (647). Outside of technical weaknesses, many also point to the social fallacies Ishiguro assumes under the pretense of his novel as being impossible. However, the definition of the actualization mode of science fiction does not depend upon social attitudes within specific periods, primarily because social values are much more flexible than technology. If there exists the possibility of a reality with the technology to match a novel’s premise, then there will also exist another possibility of reality with the technology and social values to match, retaining the novel’s chances of becoming real. In the case of Never Let Me Go, this makes the author’s message more frightening and uncanny.
	What makes the actualization mode of science fiction so powerful is not the frightening powers of technology, but what that technology may inspire within us. By confronting his audience with a plausible scenario, the author forces his reader to question his actions and values from the perspectives of characters in the story, without the excuse of it being a purely hypothetical situation, and therefore not worthy of introspection. This way, the author guides the reader’s journey within himself, exploring his conflicting ideals within the abstractions of social class, natural rights, and morality.
	In the novel Never Let Me Go, Ishiguro takes advantage of actualization fiction to draw his readers into the dystopian world he has created – and question their role in it. He initializes this by establishing the setting in a very realistic location, starting with a believable English boarding school,” Hailsham,” and transitioning to hospital-like “recovery centres” akin to those in the real world later in the plot, with seemingly normal characters Kathy, Ruth, and Tommy. As the novel continues, the wicked truth is slowly revealed to the reader that the characters are clones, raised for the sole purpose of donating their “vital organs” for their human architects, as they were “created to do” in the first place (1, 6, 81). By grounding his novel in such a way, Ishiguro creates a stable foundation for his story by erasing the doubts that it could only exist in the world of fiction; besides the human cloning aspect, none of the facilities or technologies described in the book could not exist in the modern day or future, including the organ donation process, which is commonly practiced today. The possibility of these features connects with the reader on a personal level, pushing him to not only fear the foreign predicaments Kathy faces, but empathize with the characters as they face the horrors of technology which could very soon become more of a reality than fiction.
	But even more frightening than Never Let Me Go’s dark yet realistic premise is the knowledge of its possible inception in the modern day. Today, more than ever, Ishiguro’s once highly preposterous setting does not seem so far off, especially with the rapid development and research into artificial intelligence and intimate human-android interaction. In his date with the robot Repliee, which was recorded in the Scientific American Mind, created in Japan by Hiroshi Ishiguro (unrelated to the author Kasuo Ishiguro), Epstein reflected on the quality and progress artificial life research had made as “extraordinary” and uncanny (70). Not only did Repliee look “utterly realistic” with the ability to “react to sound and movement” with “blinks” and “head shifts,” but she was also able to “navigate mazes” and hold “superficial” conversations with basic commentary (71). It is this exact rapid development into the fields of alternative life, including AI and cloning, that create the light, peppered layers of actualization underlying Never Let Me Go; as humanity continues to explore the possibilities and benefits of alternative life, one must wonder where the boundary between the exploration of mankind’s innovation ends and the exploitation of its creations begins. By showcasing how society reacts to such a question with the moral and physical exploitation of cloning technology, and justifying its premise with implied current scientific trends and logical assumptions of the future, Ishiguro forces his reader to analyze his perspective on the one-sided relationship between technology and culture through characters like Kathy, and what this reveals about his personal values.
      Ishiguro smoothly integrates a relevant moral premise with a reflective plot to communicate with his audience through its main characters. As Kathy, Ruth, and Tommy develop to cope with the challenges of Ishiguro’s plausible reality, so too does the reader through empathy. The relatively linear progression of the story aids this immensely, and illustrates the divergence of their views and beliefs, mirroring a few of the many possible perspectives readers may have about Ishiguro’s plausible reality. Upon their arrival to “the cottages,” Kathy, Ruth, and Tommy all express their sentimental desires in different ways: while Kathy holds on to mementos from Hailsham like her “essays” with a “new importance” attached to them, and Tommy clings to hope through his secret “animal drawings,” Ruth honors her roots more subtly through late-night chats with Kathy, and eventually not at all (115, 241). By connecting his characters’ reactions to educational transitions, Ishiguro is able parallel them with how people may hold on to traditional values and express his views about such methods. Just as Kathy and Tommy’s sentimentalism and reverence for Hailsham values provide them with a stronger ideological compass, it also hinders their ability to adapt with lofty expectations of their reality – the privileged values they were taught in school, such as the value of the arts, has no actual bearing on the rest of their lives. Similarly, questions of traditional values in the modern day, such as religion and caste, have provided people with a center to base their lives around, but have also constrained the limits of their technological innovation. Meanwhile, Ruth’s attitude with adapting to new cultures in place of the old ironically mirrors that of successful visionaries of the past. Such trends may be seen in the real world as well, and Ishiguro’s points are made more valid because of it. Research from Stabile in her published findings, “National Determinants of Cloning Policy,” suggests “that nations with higher per-capita incomes and permissive abortion laws are more likely to take a permissive stance toward cloning,” especially “therapeutic cloning research,” a kind of procedure which destroys embryos to produce organs from their stem cells, aligning with many of the hypothetical societal sentiments expressed in Never Let Me Go (449). Ishiguro’s commentary on such matters through his characters’ actions suggests the importance of traditional moral values in a world that is increasingly forgetting what it means to be from Hailsham - to be truly human.
      Ishiguro also outlines the consequences of the proper reactions against growing cruel practices by juxtaposing the deaths of his characters. Before her death, Ruth concedes that she “kept” Kathy and Tommy “apart,” and leaves them with a final gift: “Madame’s address” for the two to attempt a “deferral,” illustrating a lingering hope for the unproven possibility of a better life (page 232-234). As she dies, Ruth appears to “understand” Kathy and dies with the same hope she left Kathy still in mind, unaware that it was an illusion to begin with (page 236). By portraying Ruth’s death as satisfied yet ignorant, Ishiguro conveys to the reader the belief that subsisting on hope alone while procrastinating to validate that hope accomplishes nothing in the end, as it does for Ruth; “there’s no truth in the rumor” as there is no hope for a society that only wishes its technological pursuits would go well (258). In contrast, Tommy’s final moments are portrayed as more noble. Following the revelation that “deferrals don’t exist,” Tommy enters a “shouting” rage reminiscent of those in his childhood, and is eventually quelled by Kathy (258, 274). Tommy realizes that what is important is to “hold onto” Kathy for as long as he can, though he knows their days are numbered, and dies seemingly in peace knowing that he did all he could have with his remaining days (282). Tommy’s death appears to reflect Ishiguro’s views on the pursuit of truth. Although it is not pleasant to realize the cruelty and fear inspired by technology, as Tommy did, it is necessary to completely explore the origins of technophobia and the warnings of authors like Ishiguro.
	Ishiguro skillfully employs technophobia to analyze not only the impacts of technology on society, but how that relationship may change the landscape of cruelty, emphasizing that what people are afraid of is not what technology may one day be, but the cruelty it may one day reveal about themselves. When explaining to Tommy and Kathy why clones are treated so inhumanely, Miss Emily explains that the “world didn't want to be reminded how the donation programme really worked. They didn't want to think about [clones like Kathy and Tommy], or about the conditions [they] were brought up in. In other words, [Kathy and Tommy], they wanted [clones] back in the shadows,” as if they did not exist at all (264-265). By portraying a society that ignores the blatant sacrifice of life, Ishiguro illustrates the impact of ignoring the human “vulnerability” discussed by Butler in her piece, Precarious Life: The Powers of Mourning and Violence (19). Butler explains how “when grieving is something to be feared, our fears can give rise to the impulse to resolve it quickly, to banish it in the name of an action invested with the power to restore the loss or return the world to a former order, or to reinvigorate a fantasy that the world formerly was orderly,” just as Never Let Me Go’s society has (29-30). However, according to Butler, “to foreclose that vulnerability, to banish it, to make ourselves secure at the expense of every other human consideration is to eradicate one of the most important resources from which we must take our bearings and find our way” – suffering (30). Ishiguro alludes to how, by forgetting the importance of suffering in the creation of identity, people will only cause even more pain, in this case through the abuse of technology. Ishiguro pleads for a reevaluation on the influence of science in the devaluation of life, and protests for an active rejection of complacency.
	Through the complacency of resistance to technology in the novel, Ishiguro urges the reader to take a proactive approach in evaluating the moral direction for science. Throughout the story, Kathy, Ruth, and Tommy, all comprehend their eminent fates to become “completed,” but repeatedly fail to properly fear or resist its obvious horror until they are toward the end of their life spans: as children and adolescents, they continue to make jokes of how they will “unzip” during surgery, dream of “office” settings to “ideally work in,” coping with despair through regular humor and chit-chat (85, 101, 144). These behaviors align with Robbin’s perspective in his analysis, “Cruelty Is Bad: Banality and Proximity in ‘Never Let Me Go,’” that “Ishiguro is urging us to perceive the horror that floats just beyond the horizon of our daily routine,” to “try to think of [ourselves] as a statistic, if only so as not to join the millions in thinking of [ourselves] as an improbable individual exception to the statistical rule” and confront the truth (294). By displaying the effects of the main characters’ inaction later in the novel, Ishiguro calls for the reader to follow a different path from his novel’s characters and society. He uses technophobia within actualization science fiction to illuminate for his reader that, without a proper, active fear of technology, it may one day distort not only the value of life, but man’s ability to identify the truth itself.
	Kazuo Ishiguro eloquently displays the power of actualization science fiction in instilling technophobia, and its role in heeding people to examine their relationship with technology beyond their day-to-day lives. Consequently, he warns against the dangers of abstracting the benefits we may receive from technology through putting its cost in the shadows, whether it be life or otherwise. Today, these messages ring true from moral dilemmas involving the research costs of therapeutic cloning, to the environmental detriments required of modern technological pleasantries; people must not forget the fear which drives them to question such developments. Such concerns, hypothetical and real, will always thrive in the shadows - it is our responsibility, as conscious citizens and as heralds of the future, to bring them out of our dreams, and into the light of fear.











Bibliography


Butler, Judith. Precarious Life: The Powers of Mourning and Violence. Verso, 2006.
Robbins, B. “Cruelty Is Bad: Banality and Proximity in Never Let Me Go.” Novel: A Forum on Fiction 40.3 (2007): 289-302.
Epstein, Robert. “My Date with a Robot.” Scientific American Mind 17.3 (2006): 68-73.
Stabile, Bonnie. “National Determinants of Cloning Policy.” Social Science Quarterly 87.2 (2006): 449-458.
Griffin, Gabriele. “Science and the Cultural Imaginary: The Case of Kazuo Ishiguro's Never Let Me Go.” Textual Practice 23.4 (2009): 645-663.

Li 9


